=== Extracted from reference/MeZO.pdf ===
Fine-Tuning Language Models with Just
Forward Passes
Sadhika Malladi∗
Tianyu Gao∗
Eshaan Nichani
Alex Damian
Jason D. Lee
Danqi Chen
Sanjeev Arora
Princeton University
{smalladi, tianyug, eshnich, ad27, jasonlee, danqic, arora}@princeton.edu
Abstract
Fine-tuning language models (LMs) has yielded success on diverse downstream
tasks, but as LMs grow in size, backpropagation requires a prohibitively large
amount of memory. Zeroth-order (ZO) methods can in principle estimate gradients
using only two forward passes but are theorized to be catastrophically slow for
optimizing large models. In this work, we propose a memory-efficient zeroth-
order optimizer (MeZO), adapting the classical ZO-SGD method to operate in-
place, thereby fine-tuning LMs with the same memory footprint as inference. For
example, with a single A100 80GB GPU, MeZO can train a 30-billion parameter
model, whereas fine-tuning with backpropagation can train only a 2.7B LM with
the same budget. We conduct comprehensive experiments across model types
(masked and autoregressive LMs), model scales (up to 66B), and downstream
tasks (classification, multiple-choice, and generation). Our results demonstrate
that (1) MeZO significantly outperforms in-context learning and linear probing;
(2) MeZO achieves comparable performance to fine-tuning with backpropagation
across multiple tasks, with up to 12× memory reduction and up to 2× GPU-hour
reduction in our implementation; (3) MeZO is compatible with both full-parameter
and parameter-efficient tuning techniques such as LoRA and prefix tuning; (4)
MeZO can effectively optimize non-differentiable objectives (e.g., maximizing
accuracy or F1). We support our empirical findings with theoretical insights,
highlighting how adequate pre-training and task prompts enable MeZO to fine-tune
huge models, despite classical ZO analyses suggesting otherwise.1
1
Introduction
Fine-tuning pre-trained language models (LMs) has been the dominant methodology for solving many
language tasks [28], adapting to specialized domains [42], or incorporating human instructions and
preferences [73]. However, as LMs are scaled up [13, 72], computing gradients for backpropagation
requires a prohibitive amount of memory – in our test, up to 12× the memory required for inference –
because it needs to cache activations during the forward pass, gradients during the backward pass,
and, in the case of Adam [52], also store gradient history (see Section 3.4 for a detailed analysis).
As a result,

=== Extracted from reference/BCA.pdf ===
arXiv:2505.00582v1  [cs.CL]  1 May 2025
Block Circulant Adapter for Large Language Models
Xinyu Ding1 , Meiqi Wang1 , Siyu Liao1 and Zhongfeng Wang1
1Sun Yat-sen University
dingbai1357718507@gmail.com, wangmq53@mail.sysu.edu.cn, liaocs2008@gmail.com,
wangzf83@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract
Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) is diffi-
cult due to their huge model size. Recent Fourier
domain-based methods show potential for reduc-
ing fine-tuning costs. We propose a block circu-
lant matrix-based fine-tuning method with a stable
training heuristic to leverage the properties of cir-
culant matrices and one-dimensional Fourier trans-
forms to reduce storage and computation costs.
Experiments show that our method uses 14× less
number of parameters than VeRA, 16× smaller
than LoRA and 32× less FLOPs than FourierFT,
while maintaining close or better task performance.
Our approach presents a promising way in fre-
quency domain to fine-tune large models on down-
stream tasks.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have been applied to serve
as foundation models for many applications [Cheng et al.,
2024] because of their outstanding performance in various
tasks. Different from many traditional deep learning appli-
cations, these models are trained in an unsupervised fashion
on large scale of data. The huge data volume also indirectly
forces LLMs to perform unsupervised training, since collect-
ing human labels can be expensive and slow. Starting from
the classical BERT model [Devlin et al., 2019], LLMs de-
velops into GPT model [Brown et al., 2020], which inspires
many modern LLMs like the LLaMA model [Touvron et al.,
2023].
Given a well trained LLM, it is not directly applicable to
downstream tasks. As a task is often highly customized (e.g.,
write a story based on some keywords), there is some need
to further fine-tune the model to better fit the application. In
general, there are three ways to fine-tune a LLM, i.e., full
fine-tuning, partially fine-tuning and prompt tuning. Full fine-
tuning means training all parameters of the LLM on down-
stream task data, but it can be challenging due to the huge
computation resource cost. Partially fine-tuning is training
a small part of parameters, which takes much less memory,
computation time, and power consumption. Prompt tuning is
to add more description (e.g., some task examples) in input so
that LLM can learn during inference time. Such capability is
also called in context learning. However, prompt tuning can
be 

